---
layout: publications
title: "RISM at the IAML 2018 Congress (Leipzig, Germany)"
lang: de
permalink: /publications/iaml-konferenzen/2018.html
old_url: http://www.rism.info/de/publikationen/iaml-konferenzen/2018.html
---

# RISM at the IAML 2018 Congress (Leipzig, Germany)

The annual congress of the[International Association of Music Libraries, Archives and Documentation Centres](http://www.iaml.info/congresses/2018-leipzig){:target="_blank"} took place from 22-27 July 2018 at the[Hochschule für Musik und Theater "Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy" Leipzig (HMT)](http://www.hmt-leipzig.de).  
  
Presentations are linked here and on the IAML website. RISM sponsored the following congress sessions:

Tuesday, 24 July     

- 11.00–12.30       
Workshop: RISM Muscat introduction course in English (full)[  
Slides](/resources-old-website/community-content/events/2018_IAML_Leipzig/Ward_Workshop_slides_Leipzig_version.pdf), [Practice examples](/resources-old-website/community-content/events/2018_IAML_Leipzig/Ward_Leipzig_Workshop_examples.pdf), [Handout](/resources-old-website/community-content/events/2018_IAML_Leipzig/Ward_Leipzig_Handout_with_examples.pdf) (all English)     
  
- 14.00–15.30   
Workshop: RISM Muscat introduction course in German (full)  
In this workshop RISM’s specially developed programme for documenting musical sources, called [Muscat](/community/muscat.html), will be demonstrated. Muscat is a web-based, platform-independent, and open-source programme that is available free of charge. An overview of Muscat will be given and there will also be an opportunity to catalogue music directly into Muscat. RISM encourages librarians to include music manuscripts from any time period up to the present, printed materials until ca. 1900, as well as libretti and treatises.  
  

Thursday, 26 July     

- 11.00–12.30       
Advisory Council (open to all national working group representatives)  
Chair: Gottfried Heinz-Kronberger (Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Munich)      

- 16.00-17.30        
Commission Mixte (closed)        
Chair: Richard Chesser (British Library, London)

   

Friday, 27 July       

- 11.00–12.30 RISM Open Session  
Chair: Klaus Keil (RISM Zentralredaktion, Frankfurt am Main)
  - Klaus Keil (RISM Zentralredaktion, Frankfurt am Main) and Jürgen Diet (Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Munich)  
RISM news, including a presentation of the newly released RISM online catalog   
[Slides](http://www.iaml.info/sites/default/files/pdf/diet_rism_opac_presentation_iaml2018.pdf){:target="_blank"} (Diet: RISM online catalog)
  - Andrea Hartmann (RISM Germany, Dresden office) Cataloguing music prints in RISM. Recent developments   
**Abstract** : Im Rahmen des von der Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft geförderten Fachinformationsdienst Musik entwickelt die SLUB Dresden gemeinsam mit der RISM-Zentralredaktion das Drucke-Template der RISM-Katalogisierungssoftware Muscat und katalogisiert derzeit eine Pilotmenge von 1.300 Einheiten. Der Vortrag beschreibt die Zielsetzung und die ersten Erfahrungen des Projekts.
  - David Blum (Moravian Music Foundation, Winston-Salem, NC) Experience using bibliographic records downloaded from RISM      
**Abstract** : The [Moravian Music Foundation](http://moravianmusic.org/){:target="_blank"} (with offices and collections in Winston-Salem, NC and Bethlehem, PA) is more than halfway through a three-year project to bring its catalog online. The MMF holds over 10,000 manuscripts and early imprints representing not only music of the Moravians, but also by European masters, mostly from the late 18thand early 19thcenturies, which Moravians collected, copied, studied, and enjoyed. To bring awareness of this vast store to students, researchers, musicians, and musicologists, the MMF is mounting a coordinated effort to upload and enhance records to both OCLC and to RISM, and to provide links between both systems to enrich the search capabilities of each. This paper will outline the project history, focus on the particular challenges of one collection (the Johannes Herbst Collection), and provide a vision going forward.    
[Slides](/resources-old-website/community-content/events/2018_IAML_Leipzig/Blum_MMF_RISM_IAML_Leipzig_2018.pdf)   