---
layout: publications
title: "RISM at the IAML 2022 Congress (Prague, Czech Republic)"
lang: en
permalink: /publications/iaml-congresses/2022.html
---

# RISM at the IAML 2022 Congress (Prague, Czech Republic)

The annual congress of the [International Association of Music Libraries, Archives and Documentation Centres](https://www.iaml.info/congresses/2022-prague){:target="_blank"} will take place from 24–29 July 2022 in Prague, Czech Republic.

RISM is involved in the following sessions:

## Tuesday, 26 July     
Two-part workshop on [Muscat](/community/muscat.html), RISM’s cataloging program for documenting musical sources. Muscat is a web-based, platform-independent, and open-source program that is available free of charge. By the end of the workshops, participants will be equipped to begin their own RISM cataloging projects at their institutions. Space is limited. Please register by sending an e-mail to [contact@rism.info](mailto:contact@rism.info).

- 11.00–12.30       
RISM Workshop 1: Muscat basics   
The first part of the Muscat workshop will focus on basic Muscat editing skills for librarians and how to cataloging music manuscripts in Muscat. RISM encourages librarians to include music manuscripts from any time period up to the present and printed music until ca. 1900, as well as libretti and treatises.   

- 14.00–15.30   
RISM Workshop 2: Continuation  
This course will continue the skills learned in the morning's RISM Workshop 1. We will practice cataloging manuscript collections and go into some of the details of cataloging printed music. Basic knowledge of Muscat is required, either from the morning session or participation in a previous Muscat workshop.

## Friday, 29 July  

- 9.00–10.30 RISM Open Session  
Chair: Balázs Mikusi (RISM Zentralredaktion, Frankfurt am Main)  
_Speakers will be announced._


- 11.00-12.30  
Commission Mixte (closed)

## Saturday, 30 July
### RISM Day  

The RISM Editorial Center will be hosting a RISM Day on Saturday 30 July 2022, directly following the IAML Congress. Details will follow.
