---
layout: publications
title: "RISM at the IAML 2023 Congress (Cambridge, United Kingdom)"
lang: en
permalink: /publications/iaml-congresses/2023.html
---

# RISM at the IAML 2023 Congress (Cambridge, United Kingdom)  

The annual congress of the [International Association of Music Libraries, Archives and Documentation Centres](https://www.iaml.info/congresses/2023-iaml-congress-cambridge-united-kingdom){:target="_blank"} will take place from 30 July to 4 August 2023 in Cambridge, United Kingdom.

RISM will be involved in the following sessions:

## Tuesday, 1 August     
Two-part introductory cataloging workshop on [Muscat](/community/muscat.html), RISM’s cataloging program for documenting musical sources. The workshop is suitable for anyone curious about RISM's cataloging standards or interested in starting their own RISM cataloging projects at their institutions. Muscat is a web-based, platform-independent, and open-source program that is available free of charge. Space is limited. Please register by sending an e-mail to [contact@rism.info](mailto:contact@rism.info).  **Participants must bring their own laptops.**  

- 11.00–12.30       
RISM Workshop 1: Muscat basics   
The first part of the Muscat workshop will focus on basic Muscat editing skills for librarians and how to cataloging music manuscripts in Muscat. RISM encourages librarians to include music manuscripts from any time period up to the present and printed music until ca. 1945, as well as libretti and treatises.   

- 14.00–15.30   
RISM Workshop 2: Continuation  
This course will continue the skills learned in the morning's RISM Workshop 1. We will practice cataloging manuscript collections and go into some of the details involving cataloging printed music. Basic knowledge of Muscat is required, either from the morning session or participation in a previous Muscat workshop.

## Thursday, 3 August  

- 11.00-12.30  
RISM Open Session  
Chair: Balázs Mikusi (RISM Editorial Center, Frankfurt am Main)   
  - Balázs Mikusi (RISM Editorial Center, Frankfurt am Main): News from the RISM Editorial Center  
  - Laurent Pugin (RISM Digital Center, Bern) and Andrew Hankinson (RISM Digital Center, Bern): Report from the RISM Digital Center  
  - Sonia Wronkowska (National Library of Poland, Warsaw): Report on the RISM Coordinating Committee elections  
  - Jennifer Ward (RISM Editorial Center, Frankfurt am Main): Opening RISM Series C to the IAML Community  
  - Balázs Mikusi (RISM Editorial Center, Frankfurt am Main) and Rodolfo Zitellini (RISM Digital Center, Bern): Correcting music incipits in the RISM database  
  - Catherine Sutherland (Magdalene College Cambridge): Cataloguing music from Magdalene College Cambridge in RISM  
  - Paul Sommerfeld (Library of Congress, Washington D.C.): The Power of Indigenous Song: a new RISM project at Harvard Library  

- 16.00-17.30  
RISM Advisory Council  
Working meeting (open)  
Chair: Sonia Wronkowska (National Library of Poland, Warsaw)  

## Friday, 4 August  

- 11.00-12.30  
Commission Mixte (closed)  
Klaus Pietschmann (University of Mainz)  
