---
layout: publications
title: "RISM at the IAML 2025 Congress (Salzburg, Austria)"
lang: en
permalink: /publications/iaml-congresses/2025.html
---

# RISM at the IAML 2025 Congress (Salzburg, Austria)  

The annual congress of the [International Association of Music Libraries, Archives and Documentation Centres](https://www.iaml.info/congresses/2025-salzburg){:target="_blank"} took place from 6 to 11 July 2025 in Salzburg, Austria.

RISM was involved in the following sessions:

## Tuesday, 8 July       
Two-part introductory cataloging workshop on [Muscat](/community/muscat.html), RISM’s cataloging program for documenting musical sources. The workshop is suitable for anyone curious about RISM's cataloging standards or interested in starting their own RISM cataloging projects at their institutions. Muscat is a web-based, platform-independent, and open-source program that is available free of charge. Space is limited. Please register by sending an e-mail to [contact@rism.info](mailto:contact@rism.info). **Partipants must bring their own laptops.**  

- 9.00–10.30       
RISM Workshop 1: Muscat basics   
The first part of the Muscat workshop will focus on basic Muscat editing skills for librarians and how to cataloging music manuscripts in Muscat. RISM encourages librarians to include music manuscripts from any time period up to the present and printed music until ca. 1945, as well as libretti and treatises.   

- 14.00–15.30   
RISM Workshop 2: Continuation  
This course will continue the skills learned in the morning's RISM Workshop 1. We will practice cataloging manuscript collections and go into some of the details involving cataloging printed music. Basic knowledge of Muscat is required, either from the morning session or participation in a previous Muscat workshop.

## Thursday, 10 July    

- 11.00-12.30  
RISM Open Session  
Chair: Balázs Mikusi (RISM Editorial Center, Frankfurt am Main)   
  - Balázs Mikusi (RISM Editorial Center, Frankfurt am Main)  
  Annual report and update about the restructuring of RISM   
  - Jennifer Ward (RISM Editorial Center, Frankfurt am Main)  
  RISM's cataloging guidelines as published on the public website  
  - Bernhard Lutz (Bavarian State Library)  
  The new RISM Catalog on VuFind
  - Laurent Pugin (RISM Digital Center, Bern)  
  Works in RISM  
  - Andrew Hankinson (RISM Digital Center, Bern)  
  New Features in RISM Online  
  - Eva Neumayr (Archiv der Erzdiözese Salzburg and Internationale Stiftung
  Mozarteum, Salzburg)  
  Report about the updating of RISM Series C  

- 16.00-17.30  
RISM Together: An open discussion on restructuring  
Presented by the RISM Coordinating Committee  
Chair: Sonia Rzepka (University of Warsaw)    

## Friday, 11 July    

- 11.00-12.30  
Commission Mixte (closed)  
