---
layout: publications
title: "RISM at the IAML 2026 Congress (Thessaloniki, Greece)"
lang: en
permalink: /publications/iaml-congresses/2026.html
---

# RISM at the IAML 2026 Congress (Thessaloniki, Greece)  

The annual congress of the [International Association of Music Libraries, Archives and Documentation Centres](https://www.iaml.info/congresses/2026-thessaloniki){:target="_blank"} will take place from 28 June to 3 July 2026 in Thessaloniki, Greece.

RISM will be involved in the following sessions:

## Tuesday, 30 June         
Two-part introductory cataloging workshop on [Muscat](/community/muscat.html), RISM’s cataloging program for documenting musical sources. The workshop is suitable for anyone curious about RISM's cataloging standards or interested in starting their own RISM cataloging projects at their institutions. Muscat is a web-based, platform-independent, and open-source program that is available free of charge. Space is limited. Please register by sending an e-mail to [contact@rism.info](mailto:contact@rism.info). **Partipants must bring their own laptops.**  

- 9.00–10.30       
RISM Workshop 1: Muscat basics   
The first part of the Muscat workshop will focus on basic Muscat editing skills for librarians and how to cataloging music manuscripts in Muscat. RISM encourages librarians to include music manuscripts from any time period up to the present and printed music until ca. 1945, as well as libretti and treatises.   

- 11.00–12.30   
RISM Workshop 2: Continuation  
This course will continue the skills learned in the morning's RISM Workshop 1. We will practice cataloging manuscript collections and go into some of the details involving cataloging printed music. Basic knowledge of Muscat is required, either from the morning session or participation in a previous Muscat workshop.

## Thursday, 2 July    

- 9:00-10:30  
RISM Consortium (closed working meeting)  
Chair: Laurent Pugin (RISM Digital Center)  
  
- 14:00-15.30  
RISM General Session  
Chair: Balázs Mikusi (Academy of Sciences and Literature \| Mainz / RISM Editorial Network)   
  - Balázs Mikusi (Academy of Sciences and Literature \| Mainz / RISM Editorial Network)  
  From Editorial Center to Editorial Network: A report from the road
  - Laurent Pugin (RISM Digital Center)  
On the foundation of a RISM Consortium
  - Jennifer Ward (SLUB Dresden / RISM Editorial Network)  
  10 years of printed music in Muscat
  - Andrew Hankinson (RISM Digital Center)  
4.8 million and counting: All the interrelated resources in RISM Online

- 16.00-17.30  
RISM Coordinating Committee (working meeting)  
Chair: Sonia Rzepka (University of Warsaw)    

## Friday, 3 July    

- 11.00-12.30  
Commission Mixte (closed working meeting)  
